# Comparison of distributed generation of synthetic data using DBMs, VAEs, GANs and MICE

This repository contains an experiment that compares deep Boltzmann machines (DBMs), variational autoencoders (VAEs), generative adversarial networks (GANs) and multivariate imputation by chained equations (MICE) as generative approaches on distributed data.
The experiment uses data sets of genetic variants from the 1000 Genomes Project that are split onto a number of sites, which could represent different medical centers with sensitive patient data.
At the sites, models are trained and the synthetic data generated by these models are collected.
The generative approaches are then compared in terms of the distances of the log odds ratios between held-out validation data and synthetic observations sampled from the modules.
More details about the experimental setup can be found in the article

> [1] Lenz S, Hess M, Binder H. Deep generative models in DataSHIELD. [arXiv:200307775](http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.07775). 2020.


The code in this repository has been adapted from the article

> [2] Nußberger J, Boesel F, Lenz S, Binder H, Hess M. Synthetic observations from deep generative models and binary omics data with limited sample size. Briefings in Bioinformatics. 2020. [doi:10.1093/bib/bbaa226](https://academic.oup.com/bib/advance-article/doi/10.1093/bib/bbaa226/5917048).

The original data is from https://mathgen.stats.ox.ac.uk/impute/1000GP_Phase3.html.
The preprocessed data for the experiment can be found in the [data](data) folder.

Running the Julia script [`comparison_odds.jl`](comparison_odds.jl) produces the file [`results_odds.tsv`](results_odds.tsv).
This took about 25 hours on a cluster of three machines with 8, 12, and 28 cores with clock speeds of about 3 GHz and at least 8 GB RAM per core.
The R script [`comparisonplot_odds.r`](comparisonplot_odds.r) can be used to reproduce figures 6 and 7 in [1] from [`results_odds.tsv`](results_odds.tsv).

Running the Julia script [`comparison_membership.jl`](comparison_membership.jl) performs a membership attack and produces the file [`results_membership.tsv`](results_membership.tsv).
Running the script took 11 minutes using the same machines.
This script uses the [`results_odds.tsv`](results_odds.tsv) as input and evaluates only the models with the best scores concering the odds ratio distances therein. The R script [`comparisonplot_membership.r`](comparisonplot_membership.r) can be used to reproduce figures 8 and 9 in [1] from the output file.

The Julia code runs with Julia version 1.5.
The used packages are defined via the files [`Manifest.toml`](Manifest.toml) and [`Project.toml`](Project.toml).

